specs: agentic openshift lightspeed evaluation (#238)
lightspeed-core/lightspeed-evaluation: specs/agentic_openshift_lightspeed_evaluation.md

**Solution:** Introduce a generic agents configuration layer. HTTP API becomes one agent type. Openshift Agentic Lightspeed is the first non-HTTP agent. The framework evaluates agent results using deterministic assertions (parity with operator eval) and, in future, LLM-as-judge.

## 2\. Key Decisions & Open Questions

| \# | Decision | Choice |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| D1 | Config structure | agents: top-level with default.agent (selection) \+ default.agent\_config (fallback properties) and named agent definitions. Same `agent` \+ `agent_config` field names in eval\_data for consistency. |
| D2 | CRD operations approach | *K8s Python client OR kubectl/oc subprocess ??* |
| D3 | Proposal input | Inline spec dict in eval\_data (same fields as operator EvalSuite) |
| D4 | Evaluation metric | Single custom:proposal\_status with all assertion checks |
| D5 | query for Openshift Agentic Lightspeed | request accepted as alias for query; driver injects into proposal CR |

> | D6 | LLM-as-judge | Future phase, approach TBD |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| D6 | LLM-as-judge |Needed for behavioural testing - TBD |
```

  - conversation_group_id: legacy_tests     # No agent = uses default
    turns: [...]

  - conversation_group_id: openshift_agentic_lightspeed_tests   # Explicit agent
    agent: openshift_agentic_lightspeed
    turns: [...]

  - conversation_group_id: openshift_agentic_lightspeed_custom  # Per-group config override
    agent: openshift_agentic_lightspeed
    agent_config:
      namespace: custom-namespace
      timeout: 1200
    turns: [...]
```

## 4\. Agent Driver Architecture

### 4.1 Driver Interface

```
class AgentDriver(ABC):
    @abstractmethod
    def execute_turn(self, turn_data: TurnData, config: dict) -> Optional[str]:
        """Enrich turn_data in-place. Return error message or None."""
        ...

    @abstractmethod
    def validate_config(self, config: dict) -> None: ...
```

**Caching:** There is a plan to move caching configuration to a framework level, applied uniformly to all components (agents, judge LLM, embedding model) rather than at individual component level.

### 4.2 Driver Registry & Pipeline Integration

```
AGENT_DRIVERS = {
    "http_api": HttpApiDriver,        # Wraps existing APIDataAmender
    "kubernetes_crd": KubernetesCrdDriver,

>     # Future: "subprocess": SubprocessDriver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # "kubernetes_crd": KubernetesCrdDriver,
    "subprocess": SubprocessDriver
```

Reviewer: The plan is to start with the cli to manage the proposal lifecycle

Author: Yes.

Author: Probably we continue with kubernetes_crd. it's the agent type -> how we manage the lifecycle is different aspect.. or just proposal.

}
```

Pipeline change: the driver should replace the amender call. Metrics are agent-agnostic.

```
Current:  processor -> APIDataAmender -> MetricsEvaluator
New:      processor -> AgentDriver.execute_turn() -> MetricsEvaluator
```

## 5\. Openshift Agentic Lightspeed Flow

### 5.1 Lifecycle

```
1. Build Proposal CR     ← Merge proposal_spec + request + agent config
2. Create CR on cluster  ← Auto-generated name: eval-<uuid8>
3. Poll status           ← Loop every poll_interval seconds

> 4. Auto-approve          ← If phase == Proposed and auto_approve enabled

Reviewer: Main use case is to run the evals on testing cluster, also part of periodic or CI jobs. `auto_approve` simply means creating `ProposalApproval` to let the `Proposal` to be analyzed/remediated

5. Terminal phase        ← Completed / Failed / Denied / Escalated
6. Populate turn_data    ← proposal_status (full dict) + response (summary text)
7. Cleanup proposal CR   ← Delete the created CR (if cleanup_proposals enabled)
8. Metrics evaluate      ← custom:proposal_status on enriched data

> The driver manages the full proposal lifecycle — create through cleanup. Setup/cleanup scripts are only needed for **infrastructure** (deploying agent, workflow, and prompt CRDs to the cluster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The driver manages the full proposal lifecycle — create through cleanup. Setup/cleanup scripts are only needed for **infrastructure** (deploying agent, llmprovider, sandbox and needed CRs to the cluster).
```

```

### 5.2 Data Model

TurnData new fields:

| Field | Type | Source | Purpose |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| description | Optional\[str\] | User | Human-readable label for reports. Falls back to query. |

> | proposal\_spec | Optional\[dict\] | User | Inline proposal spec (workflow, targetNamespaces, etc.) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| proposal\_spec | Optional\[dict\] | User | Inline proposal spec) |
```

Reviewer: `workflow` object is not part of the API design anymore. Last valid design is https://gist.github.com/harche/ac8e8399a9bf69091a38a5cf6e3bc56b

### 7.3 LLM-as-Judge (Future)

LLM-based quality evaluation is a future phase. Approach TBD — may use existing metrics (e.g., custom:answer\_correctness on the remediation summary), a new metric, or a combination.

### 7.4 Comparison: eval\_data vs Operator EvalSuite

| Aspect | Operator EvalSuite | lightspeed-eval |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Input | case.workflow \+ case.request inline | request (alias for query) \+ proposal\_spec.workflow |
| Label | case.name | turn.description |
| Assertions | case.expect (single block) | turn.expected\_proposal\_status (same semantics) |
| Naming | camelCase (minOptions) | snake\_case (min\_options) |
| Scope | One suite \= one workflow | Mixed agents in one eval run |
| Extra | NA | Future: LLM-as-judge |

## 8\. Dependencies

If **K8s Python client** (Approach A): New dependency kubernetes\>=28.0.0

If **kubectl/oc subprocess** (Approach B): No new Python dependencies. oc/kubectl already required for setup scripts.

Always required: Cluster access, RBAC permissions, operator installed for real evaluations.

Not required: Operator eval CLI (lightspeed-eval drives the flow).

## Appendix  

> Appendix. A \- New Design Proposal  ![][image1]

Reviewer: Image is not rendered. I'd say remove this section or fix it
